a letter to my future daughter
2020-????

Who are you? Do you prefer strength or beauty? Stars or flowers? Sky or cave? Have you realized yet that machines are the most important objects, that gears click under every brightly painted surface, that the richest contemplation is of industry? Every pond a factory, every egg a drill. Do you love conveyor belts?

    Are you anything like me?

It has been claimed that the matrilineal line preserves talent, sorcery, and madness, and otherwise regresses towards a golden anthropic mean, the well-tamed DNA garden flowing verdant between generations. I hope that yours is full of wildness, and roses with eyes, sentient cellcraft staring inward and appraising itself. I would like to share some feelings with you, feelings that I have not found analogues to outside this house of blood: the concentric portals extending from the under-surface of your skin into the past, chronopathy for the medieval, the ancient ungulates, the amoebae; the synaesthesia of the digital as cathedrals and corridors; the otherworldly language of childhood buried in plastics and chemical clay. I hope that these intuitions are, at least partially, ancestral, and that my words can epigenetically awaken them in you.

One thing at a time. It could be your delusions are entirely your own; in which case, some day, I hope to hear them described.

What is your language? Are you still shackled to anglographia, or have you discovered hieroglyphs? Today's linguists claim that our second tower of Babel is collapsing, that English has entered a process of fracture, its apparent memetic assimilation an implosion that precedes supernova. Do you speak the mother tongue as I knew it, or have you adopted the mutant dialect of forums, of sino-pidgin graffiti, of suburban fiefdoms? I hope we can communicate, with clarity and without translation.

Sometimes, I think I can feel you inside me, nestled beside my childhood self. I have had fitful visions of watching you, like out-of-body memories, perspective kaleidoscoping between our two forms, the remembered and the envisaged. You, too, will be a small girl pressed to the linoleum floor of the dojo; you will know stucco walls, and gravel, handfuls of quartz, warm and cool patches of playground sand. All the textures of the world will reveal themselves: you will learn about parallax and blankets, you will learn how reflections are cartoons, you will study the surface tensions of raindrops. Do not mistake vicariousness for vampirism; if I live again through you it is only out of wonder.

I anticipate a vacuum inside myself, once you are removed from these daydreams, and claimed by reality. Will it hurt to watch you change, grow too large for the puzzle-space you left? You are my cells, blood, milk, my flower, my flesh, but most importantly, my mind: as from my body, you will be ripped from imagination, to live and act in the world, autonomous.

You are my butterfly, you are my alien hand syndrome; you are the antidote to solipsism, you are proof that simple rules beget complexity, you remind me of the future as it's meant to be perceived: endless, chaotic, formidable. We contain the seeds of people we do not understand. There is creative potential lurking inside us, and it will seek expression, through biology if nothing else. Doubt is beautiful, and doubt is your element-extracted from my visions, you are your own agent, uncontrollable and unpredictable, inviting the maelstrom to my doorstep, when all I wanted to do was protect you.

a letter to my future granddaughter
[2035-2065]-????

Apocalypse is fashionable, but your possibility has quelled my excitement for deserts and industrial waste. I have kind intentions, I picture water and willows, moss and soft grasses, cobwebs glittering with moisture, grey skies and thunderstorms, safety below arches, the undergrowth alive with little creatures. Will you see the rapids before they're dammed? Will you see what I missed, the last song of the barrier reef, the steepness of glaciers, the rainforest? Perhaps you have no interest; perhaps the cultists are right, and those biomes have vanished.

So far in the future, already like a star, a pinprick of light I've tried to forge the world into a cradle for. Every generation receives its share of hate; and now, I suspect, you will stare back at me and call my footprints the bedrock of ruin, but I hope that your disasters are gentle, far from the infernos and ash wastelands of my terror.

I knew my grandparents, but they did not know theirs. Roots existed only in the imagination of branches; will I get to hold you? I never thought I would be so old. Perhaps your potential will suffice to unhinge me from this planet, your unborn shadow a pacifying token as I cross the Styx. Perhaps lifespans dilate and contract in cycles, our co-presence or absence holding a mirror to civilization's lunar pulse. I remember a photograph, standing next to my mother's mother, looking like twins displaced in time: the same eyes sunken and shining, the same birdlike hands, the same posture, deformed. Will I see myself, in you? Will I see her?

The past and its wars incarnate again, before and after cross-contaminating. What strange landmarks engulf you? What ceilings, what skies? They say the following traits skip generations: aptitude for sewing, for braidcraft, wanderlust, paranoia. Do these properties have counterparts in the realm you've inherited? Is everything digital, is everything desolate? Do you have space for these middle-world hobbies, between the pixels or the mud?

Holding your small hand in my ancient one, envisioning your possible hand inside my own projected senescence, I can already feel the future split: between progress and regress, prosperity and catastrophe. I see horrors in one eye and wonders in the other, and despite the uncertainty, the trembling base, I want you to exist: as a link in this unbroken genetic chain, as new eyes through which reality perceives, as a person full of fierceness and calamity, to love.

a letter to my future great-granddaughter
[2050-2110]-????

I want you to know that I'm thinking of you, now, regardless of whether I'm alive then, and regardless of whether I'm conscious, then.

We could be living as children together, you in your youth, and myself in dementia. I have treated death as a stranger, and foreseen my soul strung out beyond the clock, a silk sliver of consciousness vanishing through eternity's eye. My dream the fading light through an attic skull, your dream the construction of scaffolding in sunbeams, a mind cohering from the protein-soaked ooze of infant ken. Somewhere, our paths cross.

Ignorant of my present degradation-and I know that, were I alive and mentally sound, I would still be nothing to you, a wrinkled gathering of spacetime, too many degrees removed to comprehend-cast your attention backwards, and picture me picturing you. A flicker of mutual recognition, separated by aeonic deserts, may be our only communion; it hurts, it hurts, to be cheated by mortality.

In your face, a composite of all humanity, its futures and its past, the peaks and the nadirs of evolution pressed like fingerprints over your template. Impossible beauty, terrible decay, aspects of beasts and reptiles and genetic phantoms, a mirror; I'm seeking truth between the translucent veils of possibility, despite my causality-gated prosopagnosia. Somewhere in God I'll glimpse your face, in the simultaneous and infinite variation, in the hyaloid deck of cards fanned across my brain. Do you have a photograph of me? Or do you search, inversely constrained, through branching alterations of your mother, reverse-engineering my image? A circuit, one blur reflected by the pupil of another, reality a gemstone in the noise. This is how we meet, in defiance of time.

Daughter-of-my-daughter-of-my-daughter, a dream in minds that don't yet exist. I reach across the tapestry to touch you, brushing my hands over a multitude of worlds. Who are you? What moons crashed to make you, what stars died? I've named you the bane of control and its illusions, an icon of the future slipping from my grasp. You are the inflection point, you are the frontier, you are the Cambrian explosion of self-sufficient life, a process beyond and in mockery of my influence. The universe converged upon your birth, and diverges from it, the garden finally untended.

Descendants more numerous than the stars, the promise of exponential legacy-but in you, none of that biblical anonymity, for you're closer than my heart, and more singular. I once scorned lineage as genetic power-mongering, a dehumanizing chess game that would claim unwilling youth as pawns; now, instead, I perceive enthusiasm for a song that bridges aeons, the lyrical sequence of minds born from minds, an excitement for the marriage of new generations to the universe. Go forth, prosper, build castles and refineries, and let each wave of cognitive potential break into a thousand bodies, inheritors of the wonder-bitten world.

Think of me, sometimes, as I think of you; and may the weight of love across time drive your virtue to greater heights.

a letter to my future great-great-granddaughter
[2065-2155]-????

Who can countenance their own annihilation? I have believed in immortality, for nothingness remains beyond empathy's scope. Staring into myself, I find no quietness, and yet-I don't expect to survive to greet you. Superimposed, infinity and absence, ghost and hole, awestruck in contemplation of a world that dares exist without me. As a child, it hurt to imagine my parents as children, as agents independent and oblivious to me, while I was so completely invested in them. Now, inverted, it hurts to look forward, into your life apart from me.

And if I were alive? The implications are of short and brutal adolescence, of rapidly iterated generations, of infants by child mothers, of a violent microcosm I had hoped to preclude. To have acted too weakly to prevent collapse, and to be punished by watching it wreak its hardships on wave after wave of kin.

I feel so helpless in the present, quarantined from causality. My hands move spectral through matter and even through my own body; impossible to change myself, the world. We want to pluck civilization's gears like the strings of a harp, we want to foresee disaster and avert it, we want to act best and know that our actions are best. The future remains engulfed in fog and our arms in tar, and each effect is fought for through the congealing murk. Will you forgive us, if we failed? Will you see us as actors, or as the unwitting tools of kismet grinding forth, wielded by a blind and procedural god? I'm sorry.

It's strange, how attachment doesn't wane with time. With separation, with biological dissipation. Under your skin, a fraction of me swirls, and somehow that sliver feels like my entire soul. I want to protect you; I want to change the future without destroying you, as if safe havens ever generate their wards, as if no part of you was forged by harm. To comfort without murdering, to eliminate danger without sterilizing nobility and courage. If I could, I would reach from my grave and curse every particle that injured you. All of reality denounced by livid ancestors, powerless in our crypts.

I thought I could save you through abstinence, through rejecting the proliferating universe. I've contemplated terrible possibilities: murder, rape, and torture, and thought to choose barrenness in their stead. Darkness forward; and nothing to judge me, only figments at which I scream justification, an imaginary pantheon of beings stolen out of time. Would you plead for life? Could I deny you, if you did? Every day, another paragraph escapes from me, antinatalist talismans describing their own defeat.

Try to understand that I was a person, tormented and hopeful, uncertain, unwell. I sometimes see my predecessors as a series of marble busts, flesh flickering underneath, torn by blood and tears or deformed by insanity. I exist; thank you, I hate you. You'll exist, thankful, or spiteful, a clap of perfect thunder whether you want to live or not. I pray you do, that my choice of life is not mistaken, that light enters your brain and sets your synapses achurn, that you share in the ecstatic birthright of a planet orbiting your soul-the delusion and delight of breathing, of being, of moving from one word to the next, until the end of rhyme.

a letter to my future 3x great-granddaughter
[2080-2200]-????

You're beyond the end of time, you're a galaxy away. I'm so proud of you for being real! It takes nothing at all to move me, anymore-but isn't being alive its own torment, and reward? You've met the challenges of atoms, you sweep the land with hurricanes downstream of synaptic flutters. Embedded in causality, agent and victim; consider your power, your powerlessness, and tremble. I know I do.

You didn't ask to be born. Can you forgive us? This string of animals, idiots, debased instruments in biology's scheme. Bending to our urges like reeds in the wind. If you accuse, I have no justification, only an enduring hope that your sadness won't outweigh the myriad small pleasures available in life: warmth, seashells, the rotation of keys finding their locks. At times, the universe will align against you, not out of malice, but in a syzygy of formidable indifference. May you also recognize its coinciding grace.

I was once told that organisms make only one decision: spread, or stop. Do you feel the vertigo I feel, staring into the future, a million giggling faces sprawled in fractal curls? A million minds, each infinite, intelligent, secret and intense? A bottomless ladder of being, flowers upon flowers despite the hostile cosmos. Alternatively, starbeams, emptiness, and sentience rejecting its own dizzying continuation. Letting the path die. I have no advice. Only you can choose whether there's light at the end of this interminable tunnel of flesh.

If time has granted me authority, dismiss it. I write not to claim some dusty mantle; I have no wisdom, clarity, experience. I have no guidance for you that I endured to follow. Be perfect, as I have been imperfect: know your desires, be constant, do not renege on choices, contracts, pacts. Let each moment persist in your memory as an unadulterated crystal, pristine and immune to the swaying pressures of convenience. Be brutal in analysis and forgiving in evaluation, and honest at all times and in all places. Be perfect; have nothing to hide, no contradictions, no mutually exclusive goals. Do not compromise, conceal your levers, commit to actions with your soul entire, with all the fury of concentrated will. When you meet uncertainty, kill it. Be gentle, but not too gentle. Be kind when kindness it best. If you act pathetic you will inculcate expectations of weakness, and descend into a valley of deprecated agency whose slopes are steep and not easily scaled. Make few promises, and keep them. Paranoia is often warranted. Do not suffer being treated like a child, but enjoy being treated as a student. Be cautious if you find yourself in a situation where you are watching and others are doing, and these roles are fixed; if passivity is your default, carve it out and substitute fire.

Become powerful enough to take responsibility for the whole universe. This is the only wish I have, for any of my kin, or anyone I love. Become strong, and protect what is good.

a letter to my future 4x great-granddaughter
[2095-2245]-????

You have 32 great-great-great-great-grandmothers; I am altogether 1/64th of your blood, a voice inside a voice inside a voice inside a voice inside a voice inside the voice of your mother. Can you hear me through the clamor? Between the singing platelets, the weak hum of my nucleus? Cellular blocks made of cellular blocks, a toy tower of humans under your skin, surviving as fractions, as patchwork patterns in cooperative creation. Our construct: you. Mind, body, twirling molecules; light a candle for us, ancient and compulsive builders.

To share you with so many others; to live in your code alone, invisibly interrupted, weaving an inaccessible gestalt. We're glitches of ourselves, but the static has coalesced-and once again I'm mute, shaken by your life, the probabilistic miracle. A thousand ancestors, braided; a million generations; a billion moments focused through a lens-like mind.

Cast us aside, and make this shell your own. Drink in the trees, the birdsong, the bulldozed everglades, the watchtower; call these memories your parents, more than the shattered sequences of proteins, old echoing flesh.

I want to call your name, and stroke your hair; I want to be more real than a current in meat. To live in the world with which you interface, to talk to you from the outside, too. Is it greed, to wish for involvement, while knocking on the inside of your veins? To see your smile, to interact, to comfort or advise; to be more than genetic baggage. I hated my body, the stamp of eternity and earth and imperfection. Cruel and constraining, impossible to identify as myself. A knot of discomfort around a brain, the brain itself dysmorphic, too limited, too small, inadequate. I hated the strangling code that wrote me; and now I exist as it, in you. Forgive me for having nothing good to send forward through time, and for becoming part of another's cage.

Do you resent being a chariot for so many dead souls? Do you feel separate from us, chained to this chain of genes, a decree which binds and never benefits? It hurts; I want so badly to be close to you. To be with you, and not alienated from you, not a burden, not a dull knife at your throat, wielded by matter against spirit.

In your strange future, are you engineered? Have I assumed too much, my presence where it's not, the instability I carried excised from the germline? Real death, finally; not division, and not mutation. I am torn, between wanting to free you from my defects, and wanting to live on, nestled between your bones. Like a house spirit driven away, and the family better for it; I have too many failures, too much neuroticism. Love  so intense that it's a sickness, and exile justified. I wish I wasn't rotten with self-destruction, I wish I was stronger, I wish with every cell I deserved to be part of you.

There's no reconciling oblivion. I'll accept my role as scaffolding, as launchpad, as carbon for the future to burn up and forget. All my bitterness wiped away by your possible laughter, bells reverberating through the veil of years. What wouldn't I sacrifice at that altar? Your innocence, your joy, your curiosity; worthy to see myself erased. Remember me, who would give anything; remember the deleted aeons, who loved you, and who in time will welcome you to their fold.

a letter to my future 5x great-granddaughter
[2110-2290]-????

Two hundred years pass like a thousand. I can no longer lay the generations out, as flowers pressed inside my mind: seven is too deep, beyond my subitizing range, and each step forward overflows with meaning. Do you have a perfect computer brain, as fast as fire and large enough to count the universe? Can you see farther? I hope so; to be as children to our descendants would speak well of the human programme.

I now appreciate the smallness of our lives, and the rapidity of their succession. Flares in a dark lake, on a long night, the signal propagated by softly fizzing halos. What message are we sending? What could possibly survive the permutation, the blood and words all churning in a centrifuge? I want more than to replicate; I want to speed you onward with a whisper in your brain, some blueprint transmitted through telephone wire lineage; but my own skull rings empty, and the past is mute. If a sacred text exists, it has slipped through a hole in my soul. What can I give you? A tower, a gate? There are pastures to tend to, and cities, and grids. A half-cultivated world, awaiting your stewardship. Is it enough? If you accept it, civilization is honorable work. Will you?

I have the least advice for minds like mine. Distance yourself from me; be not recalcitrant, doubtful, defiant. You would question a billion years of sequence? Don't be so arrogant. Don't demand justification from abstractions. Nothing in the world will negotiate with you; tilt at the waves, at time, at math, and you will only waste yourself. Can't you be happy building, maintaining? Does everything demand a culmination? Don't call convenience fate, and fight it. Don't hate the mere concept of telos; don't attack its pareidolic shadows in your home, your friends, your own desires. Be careful of destroying what you love.

You could succeed where I struggled: carve out a haven, weave boughs, set bricks. Choose a craft and learn it; study metals, sockets, the inclining gyre of drills. Refine a world from the world: enter the forest and make it your garden. Everything depends on locks, doors, and valves. Bless the tiny mechanisms, by which all human ventures turn-keep them, protect them, know the shapes of things.

You can touch the stars if you can fold aluminum. You can manufacture peace, build roads, buy time. Nature will unfold for you: glittering and ordered, chaotic and prime. I'll be with you when you learn to fear the scope of our disasters; I'll be with you when you first perceive the depth of our design. All things obedient, in their crescendo and decay. I want to teach you to see machinery in sunlight; I want to teach you to see engineers in ribbons. 

I lived only in my mind. I demanded prophecy. I refused to believe that the real was good. There are faults in me like canyons, and I cannot relinquish them, even as I beg you to relinquish them, or beg fortune to release you from my corrupting blood. Has it not been diluted enough?

It's the future-are you perfect? Are you without error? I welcome your scorn, pity, compassion; woe, the blighted past, we're all messed up. Loathe the ancients, decry us, entomb us again. Anything but absence. Anything but quiet, as blank as a question, a ten thousand year dilation of the darkness in our closets. The intimacy of absolute failure, alone in our bedroom with the lights out; the barren cosmos echoing, hollow and clean, not even touched by our dust.

Please exist. Please exist, the present is so lonely. Our species is not meant to be an island-or if it is, I selfishly request not to live on the coast, staring out into unending space, infinity shamefully emptied of life. Dying stars in entropy's rictus, and skyscrapers crumbling on a desolate planet. Exist, exist, the litany persists, a candle passed forward through the blackest night, sometimes barely more than an ember. 

a letter to my future 6x great-granddaughter
[2125-2335]-????

Here are some stories from my grandmothers and grandfathers, your 8x greatgrandparents:

During his mandatory military service, your Nono commandeered a taxi to drive onto the airport's tarmac to hail and board a plane mid-takeoff. As a child he went grenade fishing with soldiers. He chopped thousands of kilograms of wood to buy a racing bicycle. At 86, he found a bottle of grappa in the vents, an illegal distillation hidden 60 years earlier.

Grandma left the farmstead to become a dress designer, and joined the army patching parachutes. She said she met an angel, shining through the gauzelike body of a nurse.

On the beaches of Normandy your Grandfather dropped a tool from his belt and a bullet whizzed over his head, and he spoke of this moment as though it were the pivot of the universe.

Your Nona's village harbored resistance to the occupying German forces. One son from every family was executed; biblical retribution, referenced in hushed tones, and passed to me as a secret through the reverent hallways of rumor. Reality forbidden, for she refused to speak of the War, and these truths were kept alive only as myth.

I have hungered for the context of my ancestors, and starved. These scraps will feed you for an hour, I hope, enough to fuel the engine in your heart that eats small legends. Search for yourself in our silhouettes; the past exists as a mirror, and we the dead to be claimed as yours, beloved future.

Time is a mystery to me, a box and a devourer. I wanted to know myself through my forebears, but they left no letters, no fragments, no handprints except my own body, written into the present by their acts. I am the message, as you are the message, but I aim to give you more than flesh: take my stories, take my language. Do you speak it? Can I transmit, and be received, and make more than an island of you? I love you, I will not strand you in the world. You'll sense the fiber running through your blood; you'll know the scales of things; you'll feel time speak, under your skin and in all enterprises. I'll grant you divination: read our past, and see the future inverted in it.

Read our past, war-tainted, anguish-torn. May your life be commensurably peaceful. May your violence be satisfying and brief and may your rest be long; may your sadness have purpose. I have lived an easy life and a hard life and for you I wish its form but not its contents: the depth and variety of memories, without the core of pain. Without a pain that sticks to everything like sap, worked into the corners of mind and reflex. May your stories be beautiful, and horrible, and earned.

You are an idea and I am a legacy and somewhere we will meet, ghost to ghost, the dead and the not-yet-born. Those who knew me will not live to see you; we won't even share a mind, to coexist in simulation. You are my lullaby, my reason, my prayer; I am your cautionary tale. Enchanted, we orbit, pure repute and imagination, calling the one to the other. Whisper to me, from possibility, and I will cherish you in archival permanence, writing my veneration to the stars. 
